Participants:

Bettina Klimek (BK)

Jakub Šimek

Max Ionov (MI)

Matteo Pellegrini

Fahad Khan

 1.
        Module draft 4.2

Morph module status presentation at ontolex workshop: John and Max offered to
find a solution

[image1]

Adaptions of module draft 4.2 to be included for next telco:

  • 
        morph:generates: 1 rule generates ex. 1 ontolex:Form or
        ontolex:LexicalEntry resource

  • 
        extent domain and range of morph:consistsOf to morph:Morph

2. Representation needs modeling

not modeled yet:

N7: Multiple segmentation strategies

The segmentation of lexical entries or wordforms varies with different
granularity:

German verb jagte "hunted"

Complete segmentation: root-stem-suffix

[[[jag]-t]-e] - [[[root]tense suffix]number suffix]wordform

Contracted segmentation: stem-suffix

[[jagt]-e] - [[past tense stem]number suffix]wordform

Christian: Does occur in Splett's Old High German dictionary (https://brill.com
/view/journals/abag/42/1/article-p264_28.xml): Here, full morphological parses
(tree structures) are being used. The other (main) use case is in language
documentation (with Toolbox, from which dictionaries are being created):
Linguistic glossing can operate on a superficial level or on a deep level, cf.
German fressen ("to eat, of an animal") which superficially involves two
morphemes (fress- + -en), but on a deep level involves three (*ver- + ess- +
-en, *ver- contributing the derogative [non-human] meaning as in verwerfen
"reject", lit. "cast away"). Normally, while one dictionary may chose one level
of depth, another dictionary may chose another. Admitting more than one level
of depth allows to merge information from different sources in a coherent
representation. Wrt. morphological pattern: Isn't the idea that the
morphological pattern describes a context for one given morph(eme)? So if have
more than one (-t- and -e-) here, how will be formalize their combination?

Issue: the inflection rule forces the generation of two distinct ontolex:Form
resources with different segmentation strategies (i.e. everything that is
stated for ontolex:Form morph:consistsOf …) , but they are actually identical
resources. Solution: interconnect both ontolex:Form resources with some “has
segmentation variant” symmetric property?

BK suggestion: object property morph:hasSegVariant with ontolex:Form in domain
and range. This would allow to have two ontolex:Form instances with separate
segmentations indicated by their morph:consistsOf statements and to have only
the desired ontolex:Form represented as a word form of an ontolex:LexicalEntry
instance

Decision: not sure if this RN is worth the complexity that would have to be
introduced, e.g. by a new property or a segment object container that could
consist of separate segmentations with morph:consistsOf, maybe leave it open to
the data creators to solve this issue

N13: “missing” part of the stem becomes a separate token

Description: I think there is a need to allow for morphology to break up a
stem. I see John has raised a similar issue in N9, but what I am suggesting is
that some tokens represent reduced forms of the stem/headword, but that the
“missing” part of the stem becomes a separate token. Language example:

Eg. Old Irish verbs like do-beir:

1. Prototonic form is tabair (a verb), with the ta- mapping to the do- of the
stem.

2. Deuterotonic form is do + beir (a particle + a verb).

In this case, while the headword, do-beir contains do-, the morphological form
does not, and do- exists as a separate particle token. Pronouns can come
between the particle and the verb and this is not considered tmesis.

BK:

How are particles, or grammatical words, treated in ontolex in general, as
ontolex:LexicalEntry instances?! It is possible.

Is this an issue to be solved by the morphology module or by a prospective
etymology module? In the latter case the morphology module would already
provide the required morphological elements, i.e. stems.

Decision: created morph:consistsOf range for ontolex:LexicalEntry

Decision revised: a morph:Morph cannot consist of ontolex:LexicalEntry
resources because these require per definition to have a lexical sense.
Therefore, free morphs, such as particles, with grammatical meanings have to be
morph:Morph resources and then this can be expressed by stating that a morph
consists of another (free) morph that has a grammatical meaning: created
morph:consistsOf range: morph:Morph

Adrian will create modeling example for what he needs in this RN:

N14: variants of a single word form under a given lexical entry

Description: It seems that the framework is built around having inflected
variants of lexical entries. If I understand the data structure correctly that
would imply that there is a lexical entry as a head, and each variant of that
lexical entry is assumed to be an inflected variant, or word form.

Some languages, particularly historical varieties, will require the ability to
have two or more tokens which look different, but represent the same word form
under the one lexical entry.

Language example:

Eg. Latin length notation:

The Latin forms, nĕgōtĭum, negōtium, and negotium may all be found in different
sources to represent the same word form, but are clearly different tokens. They
should all be represented as variants of a single word form under a given
lexical entry as they do not represent different morphology.

Eg. Old Irish verbs like ro-icc can have spelling variants, all representing
the one word form. All of the following are attested present indicative forms
of ro-icc:

1. 1 Sg.

a. roiccu

b. riccu

c. riccim

d. ruïcim

2. 2 Sg.

. rricci

a. rrici

3. 3 Sg.

. ric

a. ricc

4. 3 Pl.

. roeccat

a. roecat

b. recat

ro n ecat (verb split into particle, ro, and verb, ecat, by pronoun, n. See
N13)

BK: Would it be sufficient to use ontolex:otherForm and extend the domain of
this property to ontolex:Form as well in order to “represent the same word form
under the one lexical entry”?

Decision: remove as RN, because this is addressed by ontolex vocabulary by
assigning multiple written representations to one ontolex:Form that is related
to the ontolex:LexicalEntry (i.e. headword)

John: the issue that the written representations are only strings and no
resources has to be addressed by the ontolex core working group

N15: Lexeme generation takes LexicalEntry and Form as input

 Description: The generation of ontolex:LexicalEntry resources should allow to
  take resources of the type ontolex:LexicalEntry as well as ontolex:Form as
   input sources. This is required for languages which form new lexemes with
                             inflected word-forms.
  BK suggestion: extend morph:consistOf range to ontolex:LexicalEntry next to
   morph:Morph and ontolex:Form- no, keep vartrans:source and vatrans:target
                      restricted to ontolex:LexicalEntry

