Participants:

Bettina

James

John

Julia

Elements of Ontolex/Decomp and MMoOn

https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZqVKubKg1YdUB-N2PN-YvUP76Mq5PJTV19nto7pnJZI
/edit?usp=sharing

Google folder with example data:

https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1zKCRUShvRiGK0N0FB_wJsIVxkzJa8dj6?usp=
sharing

Discussion of example data (continued from 04/12/2018)

3) James: Greek Morphological Lexicon Examples

  • 
        Inflectional classes (5., 14.)

5. For uniquely identifying the scheme

14. To specify the inflectional scheme/paradigm, in order to express that one
could do what is done in 7 or 14

John: 7 is already possible in ontolex, 14 is more interesting

For 14 any good representative stem is good for representing the paradigm -
focus is on the endings

  • 
        Inflectional decomposition (6., 13., 15.)

James: aspect/tense are often conveyed in a stem change

John: stem might be complex (suppletion or infixed)

John: give rules to analyze the forms programmatically, parsing the forms

James: for building an automated system he has a database for stems and rules
that generate the stems

Bettina: if one has inflectional classes expressed explicitly, like in 14., one
could automatically create the paradigm for a lexical entry pointing to an
inflectional class a) create wordforms from inflectional classes or b) infer
paradigms from data to create inflectional class

James: likes to have multiple levels of stems instead of one analysis of
segmentation (binary segmentation)

James: would like to model phonological processes explicitly, e.g. umlaut,
inner modification ect.

John: likes to represent phonological processes

  • 
        wordformation (8., 9., 10.)

8.+9.:James: derivation should be modeled more complex

John: issue that parts of a compound are not entirely clear with regard to
their analysis (that can be challenging) - this is similar to modelling
stemming and inflectional morphology

Bettina: always question of assigning parts of the compounding or derived words
to the lexical entry elements (and then the surface form might differ) or
wordform/morph/stem/ elements

10. (semantics problem) Needs a way to have arbitrary annotations to
derivational affixes

John: use the ontolex Affix class and assign senses

James: is there a way to express that meaning is used in a non literal way or
the core meaning, metaphorical meaning - he needs a measure of the transparency
of an ambiguous affix - just have the mechanism for expressing a difference in
the meaning (e.g. “less transparent”) i.e. continuum of transparency of
meanings deviating from core meaning

Also possibility to not segment affix and say it is lexicalized now (donkey
example), so it is not transparent = lexicalized affix that is usually not
segmentable, express that it is an element that could be analyzed but is a
lexicalized form

4) Bettina: Open Bantu Xhosa dataset

  • 
        Root and Prefix resources

  • 
        allomorph and homonym relations

