Participants:

Bettina

Max

Defining prerequisites: where (lexicon or word-form level) do we want to
describe what (lexical entries or morphs) in which way (linear or binary
segmentation)?

Working examples

German noun:

Verkehrszeichen ‘traffic sign’

Components:

Lexical entry: Verker ‘traffic’

Lexical entry: Zeichen ‘sign’

Empty morph (or genetive): infix -s-

English adjective:

unprettified

Components:

Lexical Entry: prettify

Lexical Entry: prefix un-

Grammatical morph: suffix -ed

 1.
        Sometimes grammatical morphs are also part of word-formation processes
        and hence entailed within lexical entries and not only their
        word-forms. At the moment the decomp and ontolex module do not allow to
        describe them as ontolex:Affix resources because they are not
        considered as separate lexical entries.

Do we want to allow that grammatical morphs are included in the decomposition
of lexical entries that are compound or derived words? In what way?

 2.
        The ontolex:Affix class is reserved for all morphs that are also
        lexical entries. This might cause confusion among morph resources
        because all other (grammatical) morph need to have another type
        assertion and also cannot occur in object slots that have
        ontolex:LexicalEntry as range.

What should be the difference in describing lexical entry morphs and
non-lexical entry morphs (e.g. negative prefix un- vs. participle suffix -ed)?

 3.
        In morphological analysis segmentation is achieved in binary layers.
        The Component resources in the decomp module, however, “represent a
        fixed list of each of the elements that compose a lexical entry.” The
        given example in the ontolex specification for “AfricanSwineFever” uses
        the decomp:subterm property which again links only lexical entries and
        the decomp:constituent property that links the Component instances is
        rather fuzzy defined (can an inflected form or a grammatical/empty
        morph also be a component). As I understand it, all linear segmented
        elements can be component but also all complex elements (“African” is
        not fully segmented), but what is then the “fixed” list?

Do we want to adopt such a listing also for complex derived words or shall a
binary segmentation be applied?

