Participants:

Bettina Klimek (BK)

Stefania Racioppa

Matteo Pellegrini

Fahad Khan

Julia Bosque-Gil

Max Ionov

Agenda

Update by JBG on confirmation from OntoLex chairs that it’s OK to create a
partially redundant model with the decomp module:

  • 
        schedule telco with chairs: John, Christian, Philipp, Jorge, Julia,
        Max, Marco, Bettina

  • 
        present those examples that illustrate insufficiency of decomp or
        redundancy if we would use decomp and morph

Morph module status presentation W3C day

September 4th, 30min presentation https://docs.google.com/document/d/
1wXntwVQKnGjp-F-L_RD18OKRROnV0ckPrMYhCGkIsT8/edit#heading=h.h8hngja0cm1a

presenter?

Telco 31.03.2021 decisions on further progress:

Manual vocabulary tests:

 1.
        in the next telcos we will go through the module OWL file/current draft
        image and evaluation sheet as the starting point for evaluating and
        developing the module vocabulary (--> sheet not finished yet)

 2.
        every following telco we will go through example data and fill in the
        evaluation table

 3.
        after that we will apply the collected “required adaptions” to the OWL
        file

 4.
        update module OWL file/current draft image and evaluate the next
        example dataset - repeat until vocabulary is validated

Test of autogenerated dataset:

 5.
        Apply testing for a whole dataset converted into OntoLex-Morph RDF with
        the module draft resulting from the manual vocabulary tests

 6.
        testing details still have to be clarified

Updated OWL file with Max’ latest proposal for inflection and the latest Lila
proposal for representing compounding and derivation

INSERT MODULE DRAFT HERE

Setup for testing pipeline

2 evaluation tests required:

 1.
        for static conversion of input data into OntoLex-Morph (only manual
        evaluation of modeling needs in evaluation sheet)

 2.
        autogeneration of additional resources of OntoLex-Morph RDF data based
        on converted source dataset into OntoLex-Morph RDF

Input data

  • 
        autogeneration part of module is the syntax (= vocabulary) that allows
        to generate resources, specifies how resources are generated

  • 
        rules are required to apply the autogeneration syntax of the module in
        the first place and then they have to be converted into the morph
        module syntax/rules (which is out of scope of the morph module!)

  • 
        can we represent rule of input data in module syntax? → add this as
        modeling need (BK)!

  • 
        Data format for testing autogeneration: current test data not in RDF -
        source/input data has to be already in OntoLex-Morph RDF

  • 
        Extent? with/without morph:Morph resources or only ontolex:LexicalEntry
        and ontolex:Form

Todos for next telco:

  • 
        Bettina will sort and update modeling needs

  • 
        Matteo will share Lila presentation in shared Google folder

