Participants:

Bettina

Christian C.

Stefania Racioppa

Fahad Khan

Max

Julia

Ranka Stanković

Agenda

 1.
        Discussion and rating of old and new representation needs

The representation needs will be discussed by choosing between the following
two options:

1) The OntoLex morphology module should NOT be able to express the issue,

2) The OntoLex morphology module should be able to express the issue, as either

  • 
        a) being an explicit part of the model,

  • 
        b) being referenced to an existing external model or

  • 
        c) being no explicit part of the model but at least addressed in the
        model specification by providing a usage recommendation.

N2: More Specifications of Affixes, Decision: open

CC: no, if we express position information in another way

N5: Morphemic Gloss, Decision: 1 (NOT)

Max: not required

CC: can be modelled by FrAC attestation by reference to an example, e.g., an
annotation in a corpus (e.g., using the Ligt vocabulary or whatever comes out
of LD4LT discussions on linguistic annotation)

N10: Suppletive forms replace a stem+affix combination with a wholly different
word, Decision: 2a

John: already covered (a lexical entry can have more than 1 root)

N11: Morphology crosses part-of-speech boundaries (derivation), Decision:
postponed

Marco: Next meeting: LiLa sample data with a suggested extension

N12: Morphs linked to Lexical Entries, Decision: 2a

John: question is if we can underspecify the morphological pattern

N13: Multiple segmentation strategies, Decision: 2a

Way to allow more than 1 segmentation of a single ontolex:Form

N14: The morphosyntax of a language describes how the morphemes in a word
affect its combinatoric potential, Decision: 2a

(= recursive generation)

N15: The phones making up a morpheme don’t have to be contiguous, 2a

N16: The form of a morpheme doesn’t have to consist of phones, 2a

N17: Meanings of stems and roots, 2c

Etymological dictionary for example, Marco can provide example

Also N17: Link morphs and senses

For roots or stems with lexical senses or lexical concepts, e.g., for semantic
fields of roots , e.g., reconstructed protoforms (resp., their meaning) [why is
Morph not a Lexical Entry?]

N19: Derivational Meanings

Cf. N11

N21: “Missing” part of the stem becomes a separate token, 2a

N22: Variants of a single word form under a given lexical entry, 2a

N23: Word-form generation takes LexicalEntry and Form as input

N24: Coverage of morphological language types

Incorporating languages (Inuktitut)

Agglutinating languages (Sumerian)

Polysythetic languages (Old High German, Old Irish)

Turkic languages

N25: Suggestion for discussion: Agree on output data

Missing modelling needs:

4 ways to represent inflected word-forms

  • 
        rules with transformations(Max)

  • 
        Inflection Tables with full inflected word form(Max)

  • 
        set of affixes/word endings (Max)

  • 
        Assimilation rules as additional rules on top of 1.

Part of Speech transformation

For lexical entries of categories that systematically come in two variants by
“Zero Derivation”, e.g., every German adjective is an adverb, but this cannot
be modelled with OntoLex vocabulary, and it is a productive process (so it’s
within morphology)

Recursive morphology

Current focus is on inflectional morphology. But there are languages where
after inflection is applied, additional layers of inflection can be applied
(see data samples for Sumerian).

Incorporation

In many languages, incorporation is a way for a verb to refer to a specific
semantic role (usually THEME). This is a productive process and it corresponds
in function to case inflection in standard average european, so within the
realm of inflection (see data samples on Inuktitut).

Weak noun/verb distinction

Some languages are relatively flexible in “recasting” a verb into a noun, e.g.,
Standard Average European participles (verb => adjectives) but also finite
verbs (Inuktitut qimmiuvuq “he has a dog” (verb) = “dog-owner” (noun), as a
noun, this can be inflected as a noun, e.g., qimmiuvup “dog owner”.ERG). The
mechanism here is that a particular type of inflection is “repurposed” for
derivation. Technically, this can be treated like Zero Derivation.

Derivation

With recursion and incorporation, two morphological processes are addressed
that share important characteristics with derivation: incorporation takes a
noun and uses a verbal affix to produce a verb (so it involves a shift in parts
of speech), recursive morphology is a recursive process (like most forms of
derivation). As a generalization over both these aspects, derivation would
require that an affix (morph?) posits constraints on the base form it is
applied to (e.g., nominal for incorporation), and the grammatical features
(“meaning”?) of the resulting form (e.g., verbal for incorporation). Sample
data for derivation (plus the variants above) in Inuktit data sample.

Compositional structure of compounds and derivations

Basically, being able to represent morphological parses. See Old High German
sample data.

Slot grammars

A number if agglutinative languages are described in terms of slots, i.e.,
morphemes that follow each other in a fixed order. This is not the same as a
paradigm, because this is part of a paradigm only. See Sumerian sample data.

Assimilation rules

Depending on context, a morpheme can be serialized in different ways. So far,
we decided to not model assimilation rules as productive rules, but we might
want to capture interdependencies, e.g., vowel harmony in Turkic languages.

Transliteration rules

(technically similar to assimilation rules). Many languages have defective
orthographies (e.g., writing a CCVCC language like Greek with a CV syllabary
like Cypriot). Then, a morphologically derivable form must be mapped onto a
particular orthography. To provide rules that directly produce orthographic
forms may be too complex. Sample data from Sumerian (actual data sample use
idealistic representations, not orthgraphic stzrings)

    2. Setup for testing pipeline

Input data

  • 
        Ontolex dataset - current test data not in ontolex RDF- Preprocessing
        required?

  • 
        Extent? with/without morph:Morph resources

Module draft

  • 
        OWL file,

  • 
        SPARQL queries?!

Output data

  • 
        Separate file or integrated into ontolex input dataset

  • 
        Output integrated into existing OntoLex dataset already containing
        morphological data

  • 
        Granularity:

      □ 
            ontolex:LexicalEntry/ontolex:Form resources only

      □ 
            ontolex:LexicalEntry/ontolex:Form resources + morph:Morph resources

      □ 
            ontolex:LexicalEntry/ontolex:Form resources + morph resources +
            interrelation between ontolex:LexicalEntry/ontolex:Form and
            morph:Morph resources

Testing documentation

  • 
        Table with all modeling needs, stated input data and modeling draft,
        evaluation on results of output data against modeling needs

  • 
        Separate place to store input and output data?

TODO:

Bettina:

Check access to Ontolex Google folder for all

Example needed (for every need) with RDF example in module vocabulary

Include Latin word-formation extension into agenda-presentation by Marco

