Participants:

Bettina

Julia

Max

Jorge

Lupe

Agenda:

1) Summary of morphology module start at OntoLex face2face meeting.

  • 
        Overall positive take up of the MMoOn Core ontology.

  • 
        Specific questions about the function and representation of the
        meanings of morph occured.

  • 
        Everybody seems to have different needs or purposes for the morphology
        module.

2) Overview of main questions/demands/issues so far.

Content:

  • 
        What? morphs and morphemes or only morphs

  • 
        Where? position/order of morphs in lexical entry or word form

  • 
        How? addition, internal modification, infixation

  • 
        Different notion of ‘sense’ required (different from
        ontolex:LexicalSense)?

→ What kind of morphological data exists and in what format?

Modelling:

  • 
        Domain delimitation: how to avoid overlap to decomp and ontolex module?

  • 
        How should paradigms be represented?

  • 
        To what extent will MMoOn be reusable for the OntoLex morphology
        module?

    → MMoOn vocabulary aligned with module (only different namespace)

    → new vocabulary aligned with MMoOn

    → new vocabulary different from MMoOn (no reuse)

  • 
        Enable representation of more than 1 segmentation analysis of a lexical
        entry or word form (Max)

  • 
        To what extent shall intensional modelling be usable?

3) Discussing the content and purpose(s) of this module.

→ What is the main purpose of the OntoLex morphology module (morph. data in
dictionaries)?

Goals as defined here: https://www.w3.org/community/ontolex/wiki/Morphology

Many dictionaries contain information about the morphology, this is typically
given relative to the lemma, e..g., (from "Langenscheidt Taschenwörterbuch
Deutsch als Fremdsprache")

  • 
        Bedingung die; -, -en

  • 
        Bedürfnis das; -ses, -se

  • 
        Beitrag der; -(e)s, Beiträge

Note the does not cover all forms of the German noun, e.g., "Bedürfnissen",
"Beiträgen"

It should be possible to model this information with two conditions:

 1.
        It is not necessary to materialize all forms of the word, instead only
        the relevant stems and minimal set of inflected forms or inflectional
        morphemes

 2.
        It is possible to generate any form in a programmatic manner

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Minutes:

Julia:

Assumed that module should be glue between mmoon and ontolex

Would like Bettina to create reduced version of mmoon as starting point

Max:

Still issues and examples that need to be taken into account in modelling

Have flex and toolbox data - share it please

Jorge:

Collect representation needs that justifies adding this module

MMoOn very large and complex - try to produce minimal modules covering the
maximum

Julia: are issues in Wiki issues found in dictionaries (contradiction to issues
listed afterwards)?

At which linguistic levels do these issues generally occur (lexical, syntactic
level)?

Max: yes in arabic dictionaries word-forms are listed as well

Bettina: narrow scope to lexicographic needs or open widen scope to grammatical
and morphological analysis?

Max: against wide scope. Just representation of morphemes in relation to
lexical entries, don’t represent meanings of morphemes in the module rather
point to sense outside of module

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Procedure for creating the Morphology Module:

 1.
        Preparation phase:

Define the purpose and scope of the module by creating a showcase example for
what should be the mandatorily expressible.

 a.
        Collect examples illustrating representation needs.

 b.
        Decide which elements and features are mandatory and which can be
        solved by proposing usage notes (usage guideline) involving external
        vocabularies.

 c.
        Create showcase example for morphology module with mandatory elements
        and features.

 2.
        Non-technical modelling phase:

Model the example independently from existing vocabularies.

 a.
        Create first suggestion modelling.

 b.
        Research which vocabularies already express parts of the modelling.

 c.
        Find out which elements and features are not expressible yet and would
        be unique and new to the morphology module.

 3.
        Technical modelling phase:

Develop modelling of morphology module according to showcase example.

a. Decide on name and prefix for module

b. Define classes, relations and axioms

