Participants:

Bettina Klimek (BK)

Jakub Šimek

Stefania Racioppa (DFKI)

Fahad Khan (CNR)

Matteo Pellegrini
JBG Julia Bosque-Gil (UZAR)

 1.
        Module draft 4.3

[image1]

Adaptions of module draft 4.3 to be included for next telco:

  • 
        none

2. Representation needs modeling

not modeled yet:

N17: Part of Speech transformation Description:

For lexical entries of categories that systematically come in two variants by
“Zero Derivation”, e.g., every German adjective is an adverb, but this cannot
be modelled with OntoLex vocabulary, and it is a productive process (so it’s
within morphology)

BK: This need should be solved by the existing model draft. Zero morphs can be
expressed with the morph:ZeroMorph class and it can be expressed by the
morph:DerivationRelation class.

Decision: sufficiently modeled

N18: Recursive morphology Description:

Current focus is on inflectional morphology. But there are languages where
after inflection is applied, additional layers of inflection can be applied
(see data samples for Sumerian).

BK: This need should be solved by the existing model draft. The object property
morph:consistsOf allows to express that an ontolex:Form resource can consist of
another ontolex:Form resource.

Decision: sufficiently modeled

N19: Incorporation Description:

In many languages, incorporation is a way for a verb to refer to a specific
semantic role (usually THEME). This is a productive process and it corresponds
in function to case inflection in standard average european, so within the
realm of inflection (see data samples on Inuktitut).

This need is similar to:

N15: Word-form generation takes LexicalEntry and Form as input

 Description: The generation of ontolex:LexicalEntry resources should allow to
  take resources of the type ontolex:LexicalEntry as well as ontolex:Form as
   input sources. This is required for languages which form new lexemes with
                             inflected word-forms.
  BK suggestion: extend morph:consistOf range to ontolex:LexicalEntry next to
                         morph:Morph and ontolex:Form

      Decision: no, keep vartrans:source and vatrans:target restricted to
                             ontolex:LexicalEntry

Decision: Ask Christian to present examples

N21: Derivation Description:

With recursion and incorporation, two morphological processes are addressed
that share important characteristics with derivation: incorporation takes a
noun and uses a verbal affix to produce a verb (so it involves a shift in parts
of speech), recursive morphology is a recursive process (like most forms of
derivation). As a generalization over both these aspects, derivation would
require that an affix (morph?) posits constraints on the base form it is
applied to (e.g., nominal for incorporation), and the grammatical features
(“meaning”?) of the resulting form (e.g., verbal for incorporation). Sample
data for derivation (plus the variants above) in Inuktit data sample.

Decision: the morph:Rule class can be used for representation purposes to
express affix constraint

N20: Weak noun/verb distinction Description:

Some languages are relatively flexible in “recasting” a verb into a noun, e.g.,
Standard Average European participles (verb => adjectives) but also finite
verbs (Inuktitut qimmiuvuq “he has a dog” (verb) = “dog-owner” (noun), as a
noun, this can be inflected as a noun, e.g., qimmiuvup “dog owner”.ERG). The
mechanism here is that a particular type of inflection is “repurposed” for
derivation. Technically, this can be treated like Zero Derivation.

Decision: Ask Christian to present examples

N22: Compositional structure of compounds and derivations Description:
Basically, being able to represent morphological parses. See Old High German
sample data.

Decision: might be a too narrow request, not sure if this is in the realm of
the ontolex vocabulary (maybe a better way to have a seperate - more general
-vocabulary for morphological parses), find out if parse trees are included in
existing dictionaries and discuss it again. If many people need it/datasets
include it, it might be considerable to model it.

N23-25: get Christian to show examples

→ is the morph:Rule class sufficient?

Fahad: these needs have to be motivated be actual dictionaries using these
rules

Todos Bettina:

  • 
        add Jakub to google drive folder

  • 
        invite CC to the next call

  • 
        ask Stefania if she is present in the next call and can present the
        italian examples

  • 
        update Wikipage with RN decisions

  • 
        update evaluation google spreadheet

  • 
        think about representative set of languages with different
        morphological types to be sufficient for the module evaluation
        (Wiktionary can be also used as a test data source for multiple
        languages for many phenomena, i.e. inflection, derivation, compounding)

Next telco:

  • 
        CC explains his RNs

  • 
        Start to go through evaluation with Italian language data (Stefania)

